TITLE:      Borek
SOURCE:     wikipedia
URL:        https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/B%C3%B6rek
SCRAPED:    2026-03-26
LICENCE:    CC BY-SA (Wikipedia/Wikibooks) / blog author (blog)
============================================================

Börek (also burek or byrek) is a family of pastries or pies made in the Middle East and Southeast Europe. The pastry is made of a thin flaky dough such as filo with a variety of fillings, such as meat, cheese, spinach, or potatoes. A börek may be prepared in a large pan and cut into portions after baking, or as individual pastries. They are usually baked but some varieties can be fried. Börek is sometimes sprinkled with sesame or nigella seeds, and it can be served hot or cold.

Throughout Southeastern Europe, Turkey and Armenia, it is commonly served with ayran or yogurt. It is a custom of Sephardic Jews to have bourekas for their Shabbat breakfast meal on Saturday mornings.

The English name börek comes from Turkish börek (Turkish pronunciation: [bœˈɾec], Ottoman بورك), while burek is used in the countries of the former Yugoslavia. Forms in other languages include: Albanian: byrek; Greek: μπουρέκι, romanized: bouréki; Bulgarian: Бюрек, romanized: byurek; Armenian: բյորեկ, romanized: byorek; Algerian Arabic: بُريك, romanized: bourek; brick annabi; and Tunisian Arabic: brik.[citation needed]

According to lexicographer Sevan Nişanyan, the Turkish word börek is ultimately originated from Turkic bögrek, from böğür (meaning 'kidney'). Nişanyan noted that the word is also used in Siberian Turkic languages such as Saqa as börüök. Nişanyan also notes the possibility of Turkic origin for the Persian word būrak (بورک).

One alternative etymological origin that has been suggested is that the word comes from the Turkic root bur- 'to twist', but the sound harmony for this proposal would dictate the suffix "-aq", and Turkic languages in Arabic orthography invariably write börek with an ك not an ق, which weighs against this origin.[citation needed]

Börek is largely associated with the wide variety of filled and layered pastries, collectively known as börek, that originated in Turkey from the 15th century onward. The method of buttering and stacking separate paper-thin sheets to obtain the structure of börek is believed to have been developed during the Ottoman Empire, where paper-thin sheets of dough, known as filo today, were invented in the kitchens of the Topkapı Palace in Istanbul. However, the earlier origin of börek is disputed, with a proposed theory that it descended from the Greco-Roman dish called placenta, while recent ethnographic research suggests that it is more likely to have evolved from the layered bread of medieval nomadic Turks, known as yufka, which was used to create layered pastries.

The earliest record of börek appears in the 12th-century Turkish epic Danishmendnâme, where a sweet pastry called şeker böreği is mentioned. The 14th-century Chinese cookbook Yinshan Zhengyao, compiled by the Uyghur court dietician Hu Sihui who served the Chinese Emperor during the Yuan dynasty, contains one of the first recorded recipes for börek, where a related pastry called päräk is described as being filled with chopped mutton, sheep's fat, leeks, and spices, and baked using a flat iron with butter or honey basted on it when done. Its sweet version, called chäkärli päräk, is filled with ground walnuts, honey, and an unidentifiable roasted ingredient, cooked on the wall of a tandoor oven.

Several scholars trace the origin of börek to the layered breads prepared by the nomadic Turks from Central Asia during the medieval times, who “had an obsessive interest in making layered bread, possibly in emulation of the thick oven breads of city people”. This bread was known as yufka, which is also the modern Turkish term for a thin sheet of dough (filo), which is at the time used to make börek today. Originally, börek was cooked on a saj, the flat griddle of iron used for making yufka, which was replaced today by other cooking methods including frying or baking, although the Kalmyks, a Mongolic people, boil their deviant büreg.

The 11th-century Turkic dictionary Dīwān Lughāt al-Turk by Mahmud Kashgari records the term yuvgha, an archaic form of yufka, defining it as “pleated or folded bread”. The dictionary mentions the term several times, including a variety of folded yufka called yalaci yuvgha that is described as “so fragile that it crumbled at the touch”. In 1433, the French pilgrim Bertrandon de la Brocquière (1400-1459) encountered Turcoman nomads in the mountains of southern Turkey, who offered him fresh filo with yogurt, cheese, and grapes. The filo was made so quickly that Brocquière declared, "They make two of their cakes sooner than a waferman can make one wafer." Other yufkas were served folded with fillings of minced meat and onions.

Another preparation of yufka recorded by Kashghari, katma yuvgha, was not only folded but also cooked in butter, a technique still employed in the preparation of börek. According to Alya Algar, most elements involved in the making of börek were already present in the 11th century given that rolling pins called oklava were common and that yufkas were diversified enough to be called by different names. She notes that most Turkic languages of Central Asia have words denoting rolled flat bread, quite often layered with butter, some including fillings and thus border on pastry.

Several of these ancient layered breads survive among the Turkic peoples of Central Asia. In Uzbekistan, a cake known as yupga is made by frying a thin sheet of dough on both sides, layering minced meat and onions in it, covering the filling with a raw sheet of dough, turning it over to fry the raw side and then repeating the process to build up a cake that is 10 or more layers thick. A similar dish is made in Tatarstan called yoka, consisting of 10 to 12 thin sheets of dough that are fried, buttered, and stacked before being cut into wedges in pie-fashion and served with tea.

Yufkas may have evolved into modern filo after the Turks came in contact with the advanced cookery of Persian courts in the 10th century, who introduced an early form of puff pastry that involved laminating and buttering the dough, rolling it thin, and filling it with almonds. The rise of börek in West Asia is reflected in a poem by the 14th-century Persian poet Bushaq-i At’ima, and was even considered a rival to pilaf, describing an imaginary battle between borek and pilaf, which were personified as two rival monarchs. However, Gil Marks speculates that yufka evolved into a sophisticated, very thin dough by the 15th century, at around the same time the modern Turkish börek was developing.

According to some scholars, börek derived from the Byzantine plakous, itself descended from the Roman placenta, a type of flat cake consisting of two sheets of pastry, stuffed with honey and cheese or chopped nuts. However, food writer Aglaia Kremezi argues that the placenta was “probably very different” from the modern Eastern Mediterranean pies and börek, and that it would have required substantial transformation before becoming the crunchy, paper-thin of filo today, which most likely occurred in the imperial kitchen of the Topkapi Palace during the Ottoman Empire. Others suggest that the Turkish dish buğra, a deep-fried filled dumpling credited to the ruler Bughra Khan, may be the ancestor of present-day börek due to their similarities in name and their commonness in the placing of filling in dough.

The dish was a popular element of Ottoman cuisine, and may have been present at the Ottoman court, though there are also indications it was made among Central Asian Turks. Other versions may date to the Classical era of the eastern Mediterranean.

The word börek in Turkish can be modified by a descriptive word referring to the shape, ingredients of the pastry, or a specific region where it is typically prepared, as in the above kol böreği, su böreği, talaş böreği or Sarıyer böreği. There are many variations of börek in Turkish cuisine:

Throughout Southeast Europe, burek is an extremely common dish, made with yufka. Burek spread from southern Serbia to Bosnia in the 16th century and later, after Yugoslavia was formed. During the early 20th century it became popular in Croatia, where it was imported by Croats of Bosnia and Herzegovina and neighboring Albanians. 

Traditionally burek is made of layers of thin, nearly translucent dough, in a circular baking pan. Common fillings are cheese and spinach, meat, and potatoes. It is often eaten along with a plain yoghurt drink.

Zeljanica is a spinach- or chard-based burek common throughout the region.

In Albania, this dish is called byrek. In Kosovo and a few other regions, byrek is also known as pite. Byrek is traditionally made with several layers of dough that have been thinly rolled out by hand. The final form can be small, individual triangles, especially from street vendors called byrektore who sell byrek and other traditional pastries and drinks. It can also be made as one large byrek that is cut into smaller pieces. There are different regional variations of byrek. It can be served cold or hot.

The most common fillings include cheese (especially gjizë, salted curd cheese), ground meat and onions (ragù-style filling), spinach and eggs, and milk and eggs with pre-baked dough layers. It can also be made with tomato and onions, peppers and beans, potato or a sweet filling of pumpkin, nettles (known as byrek me hithra), or kidney beans (byrek me fasule), popular in winter.

There are mainly two categories of Albanian byrek: house byrek (byrek shtëpie) and triangle byrek (byrek trekendësh), the latter being mostly found as street food.

Lakror is an pie dish from southern Albania. The pie is sometimes called a type of byrek pastry. Lakror is generally filled with a variety of greens or meats. Another related dish is fli, from the north of Albania and Kosovo. It is made up of layers of a flour and water batter, cream and butter. Traditionally, it is baked on embers like lakror.

In 2012, Lonely Planet included the Bosnian burek in their "The World's Best Street Food" book. Eaten for any meal of the day, in Bosnia and Herzegovina burek is a meat-filled pastry, traditionally rolled in a spiral and cut into sections for serving. The same spiral filled with cottage cheese is called sirnica; with spinach and cheese, zeljanica, with potatoes, krompiruša. All of them are generically referred to as pita. Eggs are used as a binding agent when making sirnica and zeljanica.

The Bulgarian version of the pastry, locally called byurek (Cyrillic: бюрек), is typically regarded as a variation of banitsa (баница), a similar Bulgarian dish. Bulgarian byurek is a type of banitsa with sirene cheese, the difference being that byurek also has eggs added.

In Bulgarian, byurek has also come to be applied to other dishes similarly prepared with cheese and eggs, such as chushka byurek (чушка бюрек), a peeled and roasted pepper filled with cheese, and tikvichka byurek (тиквичка бюрек), blanched or uncooked bits of squash with egg filling.

In Greece, boureki or bourekaki, and Cyprus poureki (πουρέκι, in the Greek dialects of the island) are small pastries made with phyllo dough or with pastry crust. Pastries in the börek family are also called pita (pie): tiropita, spanakopita, and so on. Galaktoboureko is a syrupy phyllo pastry filled with custard, common throughout Greece and Cyprus. In the Epirus, σκερ-μπουρέκ is a small rosewater-flavoured marzipan sweet. Bougatsa is a Greek variation of a borek which consists of either semolina custard, cheese, or minced meat filling between layers of phyllo, and is said to originate in the city of Serres, an art of pastry brought with the immigrants from Constantinople and is most popular in Thessaloniki, in the Central Macedonia region of Northern Greece. Serres achieved the record for the largest puff pastry on 1 June 2008. It weighed 182.2 kg (402 lb), was 20 metres (66 ft) long, and was made by more than 40 bakers. In Venetian Corfu, boureki was also called burriche, and filled with meat and leafy greens.

The recipe for "round" burek was developed in the Serbian town of Niš. In 1498, it was introduced by a famous Turkish baker, Mehmed Oğlu, from Istanbul. Eventually burek spread from the southeast of Serbia to Macedonia and Bosnia, and later to the rest of Yugoslavia. Niš, the in official capital of burek, hosts an annual burek competition and festival called Buregdžijada. In 2005, a 100 kg (220 lbs) burek was made, with a diameter of 2 metres (≈6 ft) and it is considered to have been the world's biggest burek ever made.[better source needed]

In Slovenia, burek is a recognizable and widely available fast food, particularly among students and in urban nightlife settings. While it enjoys popularity in certain contexts, it also carries complex cultural associations linked to its origins in Yugoslavia, and is not universally embraced as part of mainstream Slovenian cuisine.

The regional cuisine of the Moldavian West bank of the Pruth still yields a type of dumpling-like food called burechiuşe (sometimes called burechiţe) which is described as dough in the shape of a ravioli-like square which is filled with mushrooms such as Boletus edulis, and sealed around its edges and then tossed and subsequently boiled in borscht like soups or chorbas.[better source needed] They are traditionally eaten in the last day of fasting at the time of the Christmas Eve. It is unclear if the burechiuşe derive their name from the Turco-Greek börek (which is a distinct possibility given the fact that Moldavia was ruled for many decades by dynasties of Greek Phanariotes and that encouraged Greek colonists to settle in the area), so at the receiving end of cultural and culinary influences coming from them, or it takes its name from that of the mushroom Boletus (burete in its Romanian language rhotacised version, and it meant "mushroom" as well as "sponge") by the pattern of the ravioli, which were named after the Italian name of the turnip with which they were once filled.

In Romania, the plăcintă is considered a variation of the phyllo-wrapped pie, with the dough traditionally stuffed with cheese. In Dobruja, an eastern territory that used to be a Turkish province, one can find both the Turkish influence—plăcintă dobrogeană either filled with cheese or with minced meat and served with sheep yoghurt or the Tatar street food Suberek—a deep-fried half-moon cheese-filled dough.

Even though borek is very popular in the cuisines of the former Ottoman Empire, especially in North Africa and throughout Southeast Europe, it originated in Anatolia. Borek is also part of Mizrahi and Sephardic Jewish traditions. They have been adopted by the Ottoman Jewish communities, and have been described—along with boyos de pan and bulemas—as forming "the trio of preeminent Ottoman Jewish pastries".

In Algeria, this dish is called bourek, a roll of pastry sheet stuffed with meat, onions, and spice, is one of the main appetizers of Algerian cuisine.

It is a starter served when receiving guests and especially during Ramadan evenings during the round meal of the holy month, usually accompanied by Algerian Chorba or Harira. Other forms include bourek packed with chicken and onions, shrimp and béchamel sauce, or a vegetarian alternative usually made of mashed potatoes and spinach.

Another Algerian variant of Bourek is called Brik or Brika, a speciality of Algeria's east, notably Annaba. It is a savory entree made from brik leaf, stuffed with mashed potatoes and a mixture of minced meat, onions, cheese and parsley. The whole is topped with a seasoned raw egg which cooks once the sheet of brik has been folded and soaked in boiling oil.

In Armenia, byorek (Armenian: բյորեկ) or borek (Armenian: բորեկ) consists of dough, or filo dough, folded into triangles and stuffed with spinach, onions, Armenian cheeses (such as lori or motal), or ground beef. The most widespread variants are panri borek (Armenian: պանրի բորեկ, "cheese borek"), msov borek (Armenian: մսով բորեկ, “meat borek”), and spanakhov borek (Armenian: սպանախով բորեկ, "spinach borek"). 

Burekas (Hebrew: בורקס) have long been part of Sephardic Jewish cuisine, ever since the migration of a large portion of that community to the Ottoman Empire following the Expulsion of Jews from Spain. The name "burekas" is the plural form of the original Yugoslav dish, as conjugated in Judaeo-Spanish. The name refers both to larger varieties (palm-sized or larger) and smaller varieties (originally called "Burekitas" by contrast, though the word has fallen out of use in Modern Hebrew). Burekas were later introduced to Israel by Sephardi immigrants from communities in Turkey and Southeast Europe during Ottoman rule. They are now sold commonly in bakeries, as well as dedicated market stalls, throughout the country.

Israeli Burkeas may be prepared with a variety of different fillings; although meat is less-commonly used because of Jewish dietary laws - specifically the prohibition against mixing milk and meat. Many types of burekas prepared and sold in Israel (particularly those that do not contain cheese) are made with Margarine-based doughs rather than butter-based doughs, in order to make them Parve - allowing them to be eaten as part of any type of meal. The most popular fillings are salty cheese (primarily Feta), spinach, eggplant and mashed potato. Other fillings include mushrooms, sweet potato, chickpeas, olives, mallows, swiss chard, and tomato sauce (known as "burekas pizza"). Burekas are traditionally offered as snacks during large gatherings and even office meetings. Multiple locally-made brands and varieties of pre-made, frozen burekas (for quick baking or frying) are commonly sold in grocery stores. 

Other related pastries traditionally consumed by Sephardic Jews include bulemas and boyoz, which are also popular in the Turkish city of Izmir.

It is also a popular dish in Libya, where it is known as brik.

In Saudi Arabia, Burēk (Arabic: بُريك, Hejazi Arabic pronunciation: [bʊˈre̞ːk]), is usually made in the Hejaz region of western Saudi Arabia, it mostly resembles the Bosnian rolled burek but can also come in other variants, and it is stuffed with minced meat or with salty cheese and dill. It is usually served during the month of Ramadan, same goes to samosas.

In Tunisia, there is a variant known as the brik (/briːk/ BREEK; بريك) that consists of thin crepe-like pastry around a filling and is commonly deep fried. The best-known is the egg brik, a whole egg in a triangular pastry pocket with chopped onion, tuna, harissa and parsley. The Tunisian brik is also very popular in Israel, due to the large Tunisian Jewish population there. It is often filled with a raw egg and herbs or tuna, harissa, and olives, and it is sometimes served in a pita. This is also known as a boreeka.